---
title: "Who Is Greatest?"
date: '2012-11-18'
---

I love Mark's Gospel. An early Christian named Papias said that

> Mark, having been Peter's interpreter, wrote accurately though not in order all that he recalled of what was either said or done by the Lord. For he neither heard the Lord nor was he a follower of his but at a later date of Peter; who used to adapt his instuctions to the needs of the moment but not with a view to putting together the Lord's sayings in orderly fashion: so that Mark did no wrong in thus writing some things as he recalled them. For he kept a single aim in view: not to omit anything of what he heard nor to state anything therein falsely.^[Adapted from J. Stevenson and W. H. C. Frend (eds.), *A New Eusebius* (rev. ed.; London: SPCK, 1987) 49.]

Many take this to mean that Mark doesn't pay attention to placing events in time order. However, it could also mean that Mark doesn't put what Jesus said and did into blocks of writing based on particular themes. If so then Mark might have given us the events he writes about in time order.

OK. Wake up. Near the beginning of Mark, Jesus tells four fishermen to follow him. Who were they?

The first two were Simon, who Jesus renamed Peter, and his brother Andrew. The next two were James and John, who Jesus called “Sons of Thunder.” These days we might think of James and John as fairly well to do, sons of a man named Zebedee who could afford to hire help.

Now fast forward to the central part of Mark, when Jesus took Peter, James, and John up a high mountain and there, right in front of them, transformed into glorious form and was seen talking to Moses and Elijah. This is called the transfiguration. I don't know why Andrew was left out. Peter, James, and John were the only disciples who had the privilege of seeing this happen.

You may be wondering what any of this has to do with communion. Were any of you wondering that? Well, here it is. After that moment, it seems that Jesus and the disciples had competing agendas. First, the disciples can't heal a boy but Jesus can. Then Jesus took them through Galilee so he could teach his disciples that the Son of Man would be handed over to die but would later rise to life. But Jesus found out that along the way the disciples had been arguing about who was the greatest. So Jesus said, “If you want the place of honour, you must become a slave and serve others.” Then he had a little child stand next to him, put his arm around the child and said, “When you welcome a child because of me, you welcome me.”

But they didn't get it. A bit later, they were shooing children away from Jesus. So Jesus told them, “God's kingdom belongs to people like these children. Unless you accept God's kingdom the way these children do, you can't get in.”

But they still didn't get it. They were really confused after Jesus said it's easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than it is for a rich man to enter God's kingdom. That prompted them to say, “How can anyone ever be saved?” But Jesus said, “There are some things that people can't do, but God can do anything.”

What is Jesus getting at? What is it about a rich man that is not like a child? Is it self-sufficiency as opposed to dependence? Is it something to do with wanting to be great? Children don't think much about their own status but we, the aspirational, do. So when James and John come up to Jesus and ask him to make them his right and left hand men, he tells them that they don't know what they are asking for:

> You know that those foreigners who call themselves kings like to order their people around. And their great leaders have full power over the people they rule. But don't act like them. If you want to be great, you must be the servant of all the others. And if you want to be the first, you must be everyone's slave. The Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve and give his life to set many people free.

Two different words are used here, διακονος for servant and δουλος for slave. Servants and slaves had a different status. The first was kind of like a waiter, someone who had some status but not a lot. The second one was just a slave, the definition of zero status. Jesus said that to be great you had to serve others, but to be first you had to be like a slave.

Take and eat this bread and remember the Son of God, the bread of heaven, who came not to serve but to serve. In his kingdom, the first is last and the last is first. Drink this cup and remember Jesus Christ, whose life blood was poured out to set people free. He is the vine, the servant of all. In his kingdom, those who give their lives gain life.

