---
title: "Four pillars"
date: '2012-07-15'
---

# Four early leaders

Before I became a Christian I used to study a book called *The Three Pillars of Zen*. The subtitle tells us that these three pillars are teaching, practice, and enlightenment.^[Philip Kapleau (ed.), *The Three Pillars of Zen: Teaching, Practice, and Enlightenment* (Anchor Books, 1980).] Since becoming a Christian I have been studying another book, the New Testament, which began as twenty-seven individual writings that were later collected into four parts:

1. the Four Gospels

2. the Acts of the Apostles and the General Letters

3. Paul's Letters (including Hebrews)

4. the Apocalypse of John.

It is quite possible that the twenty-seven writings are all dated before AD 70.^[See John A. T. Robinson, *Redating the New Testament* (SCM Press, 1976).
] An early Christian leader named Irenaeus indicates that the Four Gospels were circulating as a collection before 180 AD. When the Acts of the Apostles and the General Letters began to circulate as a collection is not known, but it was certainly before 331 AD when Eusebius began making copies of the entire Bible for the Emperor Constantine. As for Paul's Letters, Günther Zuntz thought that this collection was in circulation before 100 AD.^[Günther Zuntz, *The Text of the Epistles: A Disquisition upon the Corpus Paulinum* (Schweich Lectures, 1946; Oxford University Press, 1953) 14.] There is a papyrus copy of Paul's Letters (P46) which is dated around 200 AD. David Trobisch believes that the four sections of the New Testament were brought together and published as a single edition some time between 100 and 200 AD.^[Trobisch, *The First Edition of the New Testament* (Oxford University Press, 2000).]

A simple principle can be used to account for why these twenty-seven writings ended up being the New Testament: they are all connected with four early leaders of the Christian movement, namely James, Peter, Paul, and John.

In one of his letters, Paul writes this:

> James, Peter and John, those reputed to be pillars, gave me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship when they recognized the grace given to me. They agreed that we should go to the Gentiles, and they to the Jews.^[Galatians 2.9, New International Version (NIV).]

If we add Paul then we end up with four pillars. Unlike those three pillars of Zen, these pillars are people. Let's look at them and what they said about Jesus Christ.

# James

You might think this is the apostle James, the brother of John and son of Zebedee, but he is not. This is James the Just, who Paul tells us is the brother of Jesus.^[Gal. 1.19.] Early writers say that James the Just was head of the church in Jerusalem and that he was executed by the Sanhedrin in 62 AD.^[Jerome, De viris illustribus; Josephus, Antiquities, 20.9.] These writings can be connected to him:

* the Gospel of Matthew

* the Letter of James

* the Letter of Jude.

Matthew has the strongest Jewish emphasis of the Four Gospels. The letter of James shares a number of themes with Matthew's Sermon on the Mount. Jude is another brother of James and Jesus.^[Matt. 13.55. James doesn't say he is the brother of Jesus, but chooses instead to call himself the slave (δουλοσ) of Jesus Christ. Jude does the same.]

So what does James say about Jesus? If the Gospel of Matthew was published under the authority of James then we can get an idea of what James said about Jesus by looking there. It begins like this:

> A record of the genealogy of Jesus Christ the son of David, the son of Abraham.^[Matt. 1.1 (NIV).]

A bit later it says,

> This is how the birth of Jesus Christ came about: His mother Mary was pledged to be married to Joseph, but before they came together, she was found to be with child through the Holy Spirit. Because Joseph her husband was a righteous man and did not want to expose her to public disgrace, he had in mind to divorce her quietly. But after he had considered this, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, “Joseph son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary home as your wife, because what is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit. She will give birth to a son, and you are to give him the name Jesus, because he will save his people from their sins.” All this took place to fulfill what the Lord had said through the prophet: “The virgin will be with child and will give birth to a son, and they will call him Immanuel”—which means, “God with us.”^[Matt. 1.18-13 (NIV).]

James would have known the story about the birth of Jesus very well because his Mum and Dad would have told him. To a Jew like James, giving Jesus the title “Son of David” is the same as saying He is the King of Israel and the Messiah. Therefore if Matthew gives us what James said then this pillar tells us that Jesus is the Messiah, King of Israel, Son of God, Saviour, and God Himself.

# Peter

Peter is the son of Simeon who Jesus renamed “Cephas”, which means “rock”. He was on the run from Roman law after being arrested by Herod Antipas then sprung from jail by an angel of God. Herod Antipas was ruler of the Roman territories of Galilee and Perea and was son of the King Herod we hear about at the beginning of Matthew. First Antipas executed the apostle James. (That is, James the brother of John and son of Zebedee, not James the brother of Jesus.) Then Antipas arrested Peter and, no doubt, would have executed him too if not for the angel. Luke gives details of what happened in Acts chapter twelve. All Luke says about Peter's whereabouts after the incident is that “he left and went somewehere else.” I have a feeling that Luke knew exactly where Peter was but didn't say in case any Roman officials found out.

These writings can be associated with Peter:

* the Gospel of Mark

* the two Letters of Peter.

An early Christian writer named Papias said the Gospel of Mark was written by John Mark, the same one whose mother's house Peter went to straight after being sprung from jail. According to Papias, Mark wrote down what Peter used to say, being careful not to omit anything or to say anything false.^[Papias as quoted by Eusebius in *Church History* 3.39.]

What does this pillar say? Peter says that Jesus is the Christ.^[Mark 8.29.] “Christ” is the Greek equivalent of the Hebrew “Messiah.” The Greek word means “annointed.” In the old days, a king was made king by having oil poured on his head. And in the early church, being annointed also meant having the Holy Spirit.

Mark records the story of the transfiguration of Jesus, something witnessed by only three people, namely Peter and the brothers James and John. If what Papias said is right, Mark gives us Peter's account of what happened:

> Jesus took Peter, James and John with him and led them up a high mountain, where they were all alone. There he was transfigured before them. His clothes became dazzling white, whiter than anyone in the world could bleach them. And there appeared before them Elijah and Moses, who were talking with Jesus. Peter said to Jesus, “Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. Let us put up three shelters—one for you, one for Moses and one for Elijah.” (He did not know what to say, they were so frightened.) Then a cloud appeared and enveloped them, and a voice came from the cloud: “This is my Son, whom I love. Listen to him!” Suddenly, when they looked around, they no longer saw anyone with them except Jesus.^[Mark 9.2-8 (NIV).]

And we have this from one of Peter's letters:

> We did not follow cleverly invented stories when we told you about the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty. For he received honor and glory from God the Father when the voice came to him from the Majestic Glory, saying, “This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well pleased.” We ourselves heard this voice that came from heaven when we were with him on the sacred mountain.^[2 Peter 1.16-18 (NIV).]

So Peter says that Jesus is the powerful and majestic Christ, the beloved Son of God, greater than Moses and Elijah. Peter also says that God says to listen to Jesus.

# Paul

Saul was an orthodox Jew who was so zealous that he persecuted Christians. That was until Jesus spoke to him on the road to Damascus, at which point Saul became Paul, the apostle to people who are not Jews. These writings can be associated with Paul:

* the Gospel of Luke

* the Acts of the Apostles

* Paul's Letters.

Luke was a medical doctor who assisted Paul in various ways, something required because Paul spent long stretches of time in prison. Luke wrote the Gospel of Luke and the Acts of the Apostles. The Acts give us a first hand accounts of travels, ship wrecks, riots, miracles, speeches, teaching, and disputes which involved Paul. Paul was up against the same people who later had James the Just executed. To avoid being handed over to them he used his privilege as a Roman citizen to appeal his case directly to Caesar. And what was that case? That he should be allowed to believe that the dead will be raised to life.^[Acts 24.21.]

This strikes me as a smart move. If Caesar found in favour of Paul then Christians would gain the strategic advantage of being able to teach people about the resurrection without being hindered by Jewish religious authorities. This was a big deal because about one tenth of the Roman Empire followed the Jewish religion. There was however a problem. The person who was Caesar at the time was Nero.

In 65 AD, shortly after Luke finished the Acts of the Apostles, Nero attacked the Christian movement. People at the time were beginning to blame Nero for lighting the fire of Rome. He needed someone else to blame to save himself from the angry mob. And who did he choose to blame? These Christians. And how do you think he knew about them and their beliefs? I have a feeling that it was because he had just heard Paul say what Christians believed. If Paul had met a fair-minded judge then everything might have turned out differently.

What does Paul say about Jesus Christ? Many things. Here is just a taste:

> He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation. For by him all things were created: things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities; all things were created by him and for him. He is before all things, and in him all things hold together. And he is the head of the body, the church; he is the beginning and the firstborn from among the dead, so that in everything he might have the supremacy. For God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in him, and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven, by making peace through his blood, shed on the cross.^[Col. 1.15-20.]

This pillar says that Jesus Christ is the source of all things, upholder of all things, reconciler of all things. God lives in Him.

# John

Finally to John. Peter and Paul probably died during Nero's attack on Christians in Rome. It was now illegal to be a Christian in the Roman Empire and three of the four pillars were dead. John was the last of the four pillars left standing. He was a religious Jew, formerly a follower of John the Baptist. He also had inside connections with the Jewish religious authorities.^[See John 18.15.] John was close to Jesus, one of the three disciples present when Jesus transfigured on the mountain.

These writings can be associated with him:

* the Gospel of John

* the Letters of John

* the Apocalypse of John.

For some reason John is called the “disciple who Jesus loved” in the Gospel and the “Elder” in the Letters. I have a feeling that those close to John were trying to protect him by hiding his name from the Roman authorities. Some think that the Apocalypse is written by someone besides John because its Greek style is different to the Gospel and Letters of John. However, an alternative explanation is that John wrote the Apocalypse himself without those who helped him write the Gospel and Letters.^[There are places in the Gospels and Letters of John where the pronoun “we” is used.] As it happens, the Greek of the Apocalypse fits someone whose first language is Hebrew writing in Greek.

And what did John say about Jesus? Much indeed. Here is just a glimpse, something that happened after Jesus turned over the tables in the temple.

> “What miraculous sign can you show us to prove your authority to do all this?” Jesus answered them, “Destroy this temple, and I will raise it again in three days.”^[John 2.18-19.]

Notice that Jesus said “I will raise it again.” John also tells us about signs which show who Jesus is: turning water into wine, making the earth produce bread, giving sight to someone born blind, and, finally, raising someone from the dead.

This pillar says that Jesus is equal with God.
