---
title: "The evil eye"
output:
  html_document:
    df_print: paged
date: '2018-12-29'
---

# The ten commandments

Our church has been going through the ten commandments, and now we have reached the last one. God gave these commandments to the Israelites after he set them free. The commandments tell us how to honour God and respect each other. A country that obeys these commands will be set free, but any nation that ignores them is in danger of slavery.

The children of Israel had just been set free from Egypt. Over the last four hundred years they had gone from a position of great privilege to the worst possible situation; they began as guests of Egypt's governor (namely Joseph) and ended up as slaves who toiled under the Egyptian sun making bricks for Pharoah. Only a slave knows what it is like to spend your entire life working hard for someone else, then to end your days with nothing.

The first three commandments are about honouring the true God, not idols of the kind that filled Egypt. We are to worship God alone. We must not devote ourselves to idols, created things that are not the true God. We must honour God, avoiding anything that might bring his name into disrepute. Jesus sums it up like this:

> Our Father who is in heaven, hallowed be your name. [Matt 6.9](https://crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Matthew+6%3A9#cv)

The next commandment is about resting from work on the seventh day. Just as God made everything in six days then rested on the seventh, so God's people must rest on the seventh day. There are six days in which to work; the seventh day is dedicated to God. We are commanded to stop doing what we normally do and have a day of rest every week. This is an antislavery command. Australia took a great step backwards when it did away with the Sabbath. We used to have a special day when shops stayed closed; now all days are working days and people are slowly going out of their minds.

The following command tells us to respect our parents. This is the kind of thing that a good society does well and a bad society does poorly. A country that treats its parents well is blessed, but one that treats them badly is in danger of being cursed. Here is how the final book of the Hebrew Bible ends:

> Remember the law of Moses My servant, even the statutes and ordinances which I commanded him in Horeb for all Israel. Behold, I am going to send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord. He will restore the hearts of the fathers to their children and the hearts of the children to their fathers, so that I will not come and smite the land with a curse. [Mal 4.4-6 NASB](https://crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Malachi+4%3A4#cv)

The remaining five commandments are about your neighbours:

> Do not kill.

> Do not commit adultery.

> Do not steal.

> Do not be a false witness against your neighbour.

> Do not covet your neighbour's house.

[Ex. 20.13-17 NASB](https://crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Exodus+20%3A13#cv)

All except the last one tell you how to treat your neighbours. There is a common thread: breaking these four commandments will destroy lives, break hearts, and cause people to lose confidence and trust. To break one of these four is to commit a crime against humanity. If you want to obey these four then you only need to practise one golden rule, which Jesus put like this:

> In everything, therefore, treat people the same way you want them to treat you, for this is the Law and the Prophets. [Matt 7.12 NASB](https://crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Matthew+7%3A12#cv)

By obeying this one commandment you obey all commandments about how to treat your neighbour.^[The *Law and Prophets* is a Hebrew name for the Hebrew Bible (what Christians call the Old Testament).] Do this and you are on the way to eternal life.

# A question about eternal life

How do you get eternal life? One time a man came up to Jesus and asked him about it. Here is the episode as given in Mark's Gospel. This quotation is from Richard Moore's translation of the New Testament named *Under the Southern Cross* (USC).^[Richard K. Moore, *Under the Southern Cross: The New Testament in Australian English* (WestBow Press, 2014).]

> As he was setting out on a journey, a man ran up to him, knelt before him, and asked him, 'Good teacher, what do I need to do to inherit eternal life?' Jesus said to him, 'Why are you calling me good? No-one is good -- with one exception, namely, God. You know what the commandments are: "Don't commit murder; Don't have sex with someone else's partner; Don't steal; Don't give false testimony; Don't rob people of their rights; Show respect for your father and your mother."'

> He said to him, 'Teacher, I've kept these commandments from my earliest days.' After looking intently at him, Jesus loved him, and said to him, 'You do lack one thing: off you go and sell whatever you possess, donate the proceeds to the poor, and you'll have treasure in heaven. After that, come, follow me.' But he became despondent at this suggestion, and went off with a heavy heart, for he had vast possessions. [Mark 10.17-22 USC]

What Jesus says here connects the commandments about neighbours with eternal life. Jesus loves the one who keeps them. That person is on the right track, but there is still something missing.

# The missing commandment

Did you notice that the last of the ten commandments is missing from this list? Instead of "Do not covet" we get "Don't rob people of their rights", which is from [Deuteronomy 24.5 NASB](https://crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Deuteronomy+24%3A14#cv):

> You shall not oppress a hired servant who is poor and needy, whether he is one of your countrymen or one of your aliens who is in your land in your towns.

Why isn't the "Do not covet" commandment here? Did Jesus forget it? Is it because it doesn't matter?

# Do not covet

If you had to rank the ten commandments according to their order of importance, which ones would you put first? Which ones would you put last? Which one do you think is the least important commandment? Or, to put it another way, which of the ten commandments is the most likely to be forgotten?

What is this "Do not covet" commandment, and why does it matter? Let's start in the Hebrew Bible. The whole commandment goes like this:

> You shall not covet your neighbor’s house; you shall not covet your neighbor’s wife or his male servant or his female servant or his ox or his donkey or anything that belongs to your neighbor.

*Covet* is not a common word, so we should start with a definition. The lexicon says that the Hebrew word that we translate as [covet](https://www.biblestudytools.com/lexicons/hebrew/nas/chamad.html) means *to desire, take pleasure in, delight in*.

What's wrong with that? What's wrong delighting in my neighbour's house? Nothing, if you are happy that your neighbour has a house, or that it's a good house and you are happy about that. There's nothing wrong with desire or pleasure or delight as long as it is good natured: desire for someone to do well and pleasure when you see people succeed are great things, and God is delighted when we have such a positive outlook. Jesus calls this having a good eye. The problem is when our desires and pleasures and delights are not for others to do well but for them to do badly. Jesus calls this having an evil eye.

# The evil eye

One of the most sublime parts of the New Testament is the sermon on the mount, chapters five to seven of Matthew's Gospel. Jesus tells his his followers that they need to go beyond the righteousness of the experts in the Law or miss out on God's kingdom. They need to be the world's light, to shine a light that makes the world give glory to God. Jesus spends a large part of the sermon talking about commandments like "Do not murder" and "Do not commit adultery". He focusses on the heart, saying that hateful words are as bad as murder, and looking at a woman lustfully is as bad as committing adultery.

Later on Jesus teaches about wealth.^[Matt 6.19-22.] He says to store up treasure in heaven, not on earth. Then he says that if you have a good eye your whole body will be filled with light, but if you have an evil eye your whole body will be in deep darkness. Next he says that you can't serve God and Mammon, the money god. It's one or the other.

I was always puzzled about the good eye and the evil eye. What's that got to do with storing up treasures in heaven or not being able to serve both God and money? Here is where you need to know about the cultural background to understand the scripture. It turns out that the good eye is about generosity and the evil eye is about being jealous and stingy.^[I owe this insight to [Michael Bullard](http://www.halotype.com/RKM/index.html#d0e589). To be stingy is to have a mean spirit, to be a miser.] Here is what Wikipedia says about the [evil eye in Judaism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evil_eye#In_Judaism):

> Judaism believes that a "good eye" designates an attitude of good will and kindness towards others. Someone who has this attitude in life will rejoice when his fellow man prospers; he will wish everyone well. An "evil eye" denotes the opposite attitude. A man with "an evil eye" will not only feel no joy but experience actual distress when others prosper, and will rejoice when others suffer.

What Jesus teaches about wealth is to store your treasure in heaven, have an attitude of good will and kindness, and be God's slave instead of a slave to Mammon, the money god. If we have a good eye then we want our neighbours to do well. However, if we have an evil eye then we hate it when people do well, and we have broken the commandment not to covet.

# Strong desires

There is another side to the *covet* word. When you want something intensely then desire becomes idolatory, which is to prize something more than God. When you get too much pleasure from something you can get addicted to it and it becomes your god. When you desire something too strongly then you lust after it and all kinds of disasters follow. Remember Cain, who was jealous of his brother Abel's sacrifice? Murder was the outcome. Murder, adultery, theft, and false testimony are all natural progressions of breaking the command that says "Do not covet". As James says,

> ... each person is tempted when taken in tow by their own evil desires and seduced. Then, after evil desire has conceived, it gives birth to sin, and when sin is fully grown, it in turn gives birth to death. [James 1.14-15 USC]

# Who will rescue me?

I have trouble keeping the commandment to not covet. The older I get, the more I find myself breaking it. The Apostle Paul seems to have had trouble with it too:

> ... I wouldn't have known about sin if it hadn't been for the Law. For I wouldn't have known about desiring what others have, except that the Law used to say, 'You are not to desire what others have.' But sin, seizing its opportunity through the commandment, produced in me every form of desiring what others have; for, in the absence of Law, sin is dead. There was a time when I was alive apart from the Law, but when the commandment came along, sin came back to life; I died, and found that the very commandment, which was meant to bring life, resulted in death. [Romans 7.7-10 USC]

Later on in the same place Pauls says,

> For I know all too well that nothing good resides in me, that is, in my human nature. For while the desire for something good is present in me, the means of carrying it out is not. For it isn't the good I want to do that I end up doing, rather it's the evil that I don't want that I put into practice. [Romans 7.18-19 USC]

Paul finishes with this cry:

> Wretched person that I am! Who will rescue me from this body of death? [Romans 7.24 USC]

# The solution

Jesus Christ is the one who can rescue us from this body of death. The man who asked Jesus how to inherit eternal life was told to get rid of the idol that was preventing him from entering the kingdom of heaven. That idol was his great wealth, the thing that was more important to him than God. To be able to keep the commandment to not covet we need to get rid of our idols and the things that make us go after them instead of going after God.

Imagine a world where people started to get rid of their idols. Imagine a world where people start to get rid of the things that they trust more than God, like wealth. We can dream of the super rich starting to give their money away, but the ones who have to lead by example are the followers of Christ. Jesus teaches his followers to give away their wealth, to store up treasures in heaven rather than on earth. If we obey him the very act of getting rid of our idols sets us free from idolatory.

Paul tells us that wealth is a trap:

> Now of course godliness with contentment is great gain: For we brought nothing into the world, nor can we take anything out of it; but having food and clothing, we will be content with them. However, people who want to be rich fall into temptation and a trap and into many foolish and harmful desires, which plunge people into ruin and destruction. For being fond of money is a root of all kinds of evil, and in their striving after it some people have wandered away from the faith and impaled themselves on numerous woes. [1 Tim 6.6-10 USC]

Here is a good summary of the ten commandments: *Godliness with contentment is great gain.*

# Conclusion

The ten commandments begin by telling us to worship the One True God and not to make or bow down to idols. They tell us not to do evil to our neighbours and end with a command not to covet what belongs to our neighbour. In the sermon on the mount, Jesus teaches us to be full of light, with a spirit that wants good for our neighbours. He warns against the darkness of an evil eye that hates others having what we want. However, our human nature works against us and we need a cure for our soul. What is it? Who is it? The cure for our souls is Jesus Christ, the rescuer, the life-giving Spirit. Here is how he ends his teaching on wealth in the sermon on the mount:

> So then, don't be anxious, asking "What are we to eat?" or "What are we to drink" or "What are we to wear?" ... For your heavenly Father is well aware that you need all these things. But your first priority is to go in search of God's kingdom and his concept of what is right, then all of these things will be yours as well. So don't be anxious about tomorrow, for tomorrow will be anxious about itself. Each day has enough problems of its own. [Matt 6.31-34 USC]
