---
title: "Walking home to God's country"
output:
  html_document:
    df_print: paged
  word_document: default
date: '2021-10-31'
---

> In the days of the Judges famine came to the land and a certain man from Bethlehem of Judah went -- he, his wife and his two sons -- to live in the country of Moab.

[Ruth 1.1 JB]

> Alleluia! Praise the Lord, my soul.

[Psalm 146.1 JB]

> But now Christ has made his appearance as a high priest bringing benefits that have come about through the greater and more perfect tent which wasn't crafted by human hands, that is, which didn't originate with the created order.

[Heb 9.11-14 USC]

> Now one of the scribes had been listening while they were engaged in debate. When he saw that Jesus gave them a good answer, he came up and asked him, 'Which is the most important commandment of all?'

[Mark 12.28 USC]

(JB = Jerusalem Bible; USC = Under the Southern Cross: The New Testament in Australian English.)

## The Lectionary

The readings we just heard are the first verses of the [lectionary readings](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lection) for today. The lectionary is a set of readings from Scripture to be used during public services. It is a wonderful, ancient thing that goes all the way back to the first centuries of church history. Reading marks can be found in the oldest New Testament manuscripts (e.g. P46, around 200 AD). [Justin Martyr](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Justin_Martyr), around about 150 AD, says,

> And on the day called Sunday, all who live in cities or in the country gather together to one place, and the memoirs of the apostles or the writings of the prophets are read, as long as time permits; then, when the reader has ceased, the president verbally instructs, and exhorts to the imitation of these good things.

[Apol. 1 chap. 67](https://www.newadvent.org/fathers/0126.htm)

Going back even further, the Hebrew Scriptures were read in synagogue services at the time of Jesus and long before then as well.

These days we use the [Revised Common Lectionary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Revised_Common_Lectionary), which covers selections from the Bible in a three year cycle. Each week includes something from the Old Testament, the Psalms, the New Testament, and the Gospels.

On a side note, another ancient Christian practice is commemoration of the Saints. Today is All Saints Evening, which began as a commemoration of people who had died for their faith in Jesus, people like [Saint George](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saint_George). It grew to be a day of thanks to God for the lives and deaths of saints, whether famous or obscure, including those who lead you to faith. Somehow it has become a day for horror movies and teenagers asking for lollies.

## Ruth 1.1-18

The Hebrew Bible reading for today is the first eighteen verses of the well loved Book of Ruth. It tells us that a man from Bethlehem called Elimelech takes his wife, Naomi, and two sons, Mahlon and Chilion, to live in the neighbouring country of Moab because there is a famine in Judah. Elimelech dies and the two sons marry two Moabite women named Ruth and Orpah.

What it doesn't tell you is the back story. Israelites aren't supposed to have anything to do with Moabites. As Deuteronomy says,

> No Ammonite or Moabite is to be admitted to the assembly of Adonai; not even their descendants to the tenth generation may be admitted to the assembly of Adonai, and this is for all time; because they did not come to meet you with bread and water when you were on your way out of Egypt, and because they hired Balaam son of Beor from Pethor in Aram of the Two Rivers to curse you. But Adonai your God refused to listen to Balaam, and Adonai your God turned the curse into a blessing for you, because Adonai your God loved you. Never, as long as you live, shall you seek their welfare or their prosperity.

[Deut 23.4-7 JB] 

Another thing you aren't told is what their names mean: Elimelech means *God is king*, Naomi, *my fair one*; Mahlon, *sickness*; Chilion, *pining away*; Ruth, *the beloved*; and Orpah, *she who turns away*.

Well Sickness and Pining Away die, leaving Naomi bereft of her husband and two sons. She says, *Don't call me Naomi anymore, call me Mara, for Shaddai has marred me bitterly* [Ruth 1.20] -- Mara means *bitter one*.

Later on she hears that the famine in Judah has finished and decides to return there. She decides to go back even though her life is shattered. Her two daughters-in-law must love her because they prepare to go too. Changing countries back then didn't just mean travelling from one place to another. It also meant changing your God. The Moabites worshipped Chemosh -- going to Judah meant changing their God to the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God whose name is a mystery.

Ruth and Orpah set out with Naomi, who tries to talk them into going back to their mothers. They cry out loud and say, *No, we will go back with you to your people.* Naomi keeps trying to talk them out of it, and Orpah ends up going back. But Ruth clings to her:

> Wherever you go, I will go. Wherever you live, I will live.

> Your people shall be my people, and your God, my God.

> Wherever you die, I will die, and there I will be buried.

> May Adonai do [something terrible] to me and more, if even death should come between us.

[Ruth 1.16-17 JB]

What's going to happen to Ruth? She's a Moabite. It's against the rules to let her or her offspring into the assembly, even for ten generations. Well, it seems that love overrules a multitude of sins. Despite Naomi's bitter circumstances and Ruth being banned, a man named Boaz changes everything. He is a *goel* to Naomi, that is, a kinsman-redeemer. He has the power to restore what was lost. Many see him as a type of Christ. Through the kinsman-redeemer everything changes: the impossible becomes possible because of a love that is stronger than death.

At the end of Ruth we read this:

> These are the descendants of Perez. Perez was the father of Hezron, Hezron of Ram, Ram of Amminadab, Amminadab of Nahshon, Nahshon of Salmon, Salmon of Boaz, Boaz of Obed, Obed of Jesse, and Jesse of David.

[Ruth 4.18-22]

Far from being banned from Israel, Ruth's descendants include kings of Israel and the Great Redeemer himself, Jesus Christ.

## Psalm 146

The next part of today's lectionary is Psalm 146. It begins with *Alleluia*, which isn't a big surprise. Then it tells us something that is too easy to forget: Don't put your faith in men -- eventually they give up their breath and all their schemes perish with them. Rather, put your faith in the God of Jacob. He gives justice to those denied it, gives food to the hungry, gives liberty to the prisoners, restores sight to the blind, straightens the bent, protects the stranger, keeps the orphan and widow, loves the virtuous, and frustrates the wicked. He reigns forever.

Enough said.

## Heb 9.11-14

Next we have a reading from the New Testament letters, in this case from the Book of Hebrews. I did my PhD on the text of Hebrews, comparing the thirty or so manuscripts that survive from before 1000 AD. I looked at some of them in books, others in microfilms, and yet others in person. One is called P13 and dates from about 300 AD. I got to hold that one in my hands. (It's kept in the British Museum.) After all that study I found out that the text of Hebrews in those old manuscripts is the same as the text printed in the Greek New Testament that you can buy from the Bible Society. There is the odd difference, whether of spelling (because no one had dictionaries back then) or of meaning (though rarely a significant difference). As far as ancient books go, the New Testament is by far the best attested. You can believe that what you have in your Bible is a decent translation of what was originally written down.

Hebrews is a remarkable book, filled with flourishes that give away the author as an exponent of the ancient art of rhetoric. Unlike nearly every other New Testament letter, this one is missing the line that says who wrote it. Many have attempted to answer that question, but, as Origen said in about 200 AD, *Only God knows who wrote Hebrews.* One consequence of the author's skill is that Hebrews takes a bit of work to understand. It's a bit technical.

A key to understanding Hebrews is written right in the middle:

> Now the whole point of what is being said is this: we have just such a high priest, who took his seat on the right of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, one who carries out his duties in the Holiest Place and in the true tent which *the Lord* erected -- not merely human beings.

[Heb 8.1-2 USC]

Today's reading from Hebrews picks up the same theme about a chapter later, after WWH (whoever wrote Hebrews) spends a bit of time talking about the Old Covenant or Testament and the New Covenant or Testament. By the way, that's why we call the old part of the Bible the *Old Testament* and the new part the *New Testament*. Here is today's reading from Hebrews in full:

> But now Christ has made his appearance as a high priest bringing benefits that have come about through the greater and more perfect tent which wasn't crafted by human hands, that is, which didn't originate with the created order. Further, he entered once and for all into the Holy of Holies, not through the blood of male goats and bull-calves, but through his very own blood, having purchased eternal liberation. For if people who are defiled are sprinkled with the blood of male goats and bull-calves and the ashes of a young cow to make them holy -- in the sense of purifying their outward humanity -- how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, purify our consciences from dead actions in order to serve the living God.

[Heb 9.11-14 USC]

The back story to this is the entire system of the Old Covenant, with the tent, the priests, and the sacrifices. Now something better is here: a great high priest who has made the one sacrifice necessary to enter his heavenly dwelling place once and for all, appearing in God's presence on our behalf. He is our brother, he is our redeemer. With him there, those banished under the old system have a new and living way back to the presence of God. The animal sacrifices of the Old Testament might have been able to make people outwardly clean but the mediator of the New Testament
is able to make us inwardly clean, clearing away any and all obstacles, whatever they might be. His sacrifice is all-sufficient. It has been done once and for all.

## Mark 12.28-34

Alleluia. Praise the Lord my soul. We are getting near the end.

Mark 12.28-34 tells us about the scribe who recognised that Jesus was more than your average agitator, so much so that he asked for Jesus's opinion on what matters the most. Jesus answered him with love -- love God and love people.

Love for the God of Jacob and love for his people, especially love for Naomi, was the starting point of Ruth's journey to God's country, God's people, and to meeting her kinsman-redeemer. Love gets us going. And that's not all. Through our heavenly redeemer we get to do things we could never have imagined: to bring justice to those denied it, feed the hungry, set prisoners free, restore sight to the blind, straighten the bent, protect the stranger, guard the orphan and widow.

Upon hearing what Jesus said the scribe replied,

> Well said teacher! You were right to say he is one and there is no other except him and that to love him with all one's heart and with all one's mind and with all one's strength and to love one's neighbour as oneself is better than all whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices.

[Mark 12.32-33]

That thoughtful response from the scribe brought Jesus to say, *You aren't far from the kingdom of God.*

A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step. The journey to God's country begins with a single step, a step taken in love, a step you are determined to make. Though you may be marred with bitterness or under a fearsome ban, yet the God who brings justice to those denied it, straightens the bent, and protects the stranger will make you a blessing through your brother, your great redeemer, Jesus Christ, the one who loves you. The ones who start out for God's country because of love, these are God's people, the ones to give thanks for on All Saints Evening.

Amen.
