---
title: "The Anabaptists"
output:
  html_document
date: '2022-08-11'
---

Five hundred years ago one man asked another man to baptize him. So began the story of the Anabaptists. The what Baptists? The Anabaptists. "Ana-" in Greek is the same as "Re=" in English -- Anabaptist means Rebaptizer.

## Background

[Johannes Gutenburg](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johannes_Gutenberg) introduced the movable type printing press to Europe around the year 1450 AD:

> In Renaissance Europe, the arrival of mechanical movable type printing introduced the era of mass communication which permanently altered the structure of society. The relatively unrestricted circulation of information—including revolutionary ideas—transcended borders, captured the masses in the Reformation, and threatened the power of political and religious authorities; the sharp increase in literacy broke the monopoly of the literate elite on education and learning and bolstered the emerging middle class. Across Europe, the increasing cultural self-awareness of its people led to the rise of proto-nationalism, accelerated by the flowering of the European vernacular languages to the detriment of Latin's status as lingua franca. In the 19th century, the replacement of the hand-operated Gutenberg-style press by steam-powered rotary presses allowed printing on an industrial scale, while Western-style printing was adopted all over the world, becoming practically the sole medium for modern bulk printing.

[Wikipedia, Johannes Gutenberg]

## Sources

[Johannes Gutenburg](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johannes_Gutenberg)