---
title: "Life after life"
featured_image: "/images/NASA-galaxies.png"
date: '2022-10-06'
---

Today's topic is life after death, or, to put it another way, life after life. I know as much as the next person on this topic (not very much). There will therefore be a lot of questions for us to try to answer.

## What is life?

The first question is, *What is life?* How would you define life? Let's try to come up with a general answer that covers all kinds of life, including God's life.

## What is death?

The next question is, *What is death?* Once again, let's try to come up with an answer that covers all kinds of deadness.

Maybe we can say that life has something to do with communication and change whereas death could be characterized as absence of communication and change.

# Ultimate fate of the physical universe

It seems that things are going to end badly for the physical universe (see Wikipedia, [Chronology of the universe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chronology_of_the_universe)):

Heat death
: As expansion continues, the universe becomes larger, colder, and more dilute; in time, all structures eventually decompose to subatomic particles and photons.

Big rip
: Expansion of space accelerates and at some point becomes so extreme that even subatomic particles and the fabric of spacetime are pulled apart and unable to exist.

Big crunch
: Expansion eventually slows and halts, then reverses as all matter accelerates towards its common centre. Currently considered to be likely incorrect.

Vacuum instability
: Collapse of the quantum fields that underpin all forces, particles and structures, to a different form.

Ultimately, everything you see around you will transform into something that can't be communicated with and can't change. The physical universe is destined for death. Time, or at least the meaning of time, will also cease to exist because nothing will change. (It may be true that time, as a fundamental thing, does not currently exist. Time may be a construct predicated upon change.)

It seems that even if you could find a way to physically live forever, the universe (including your own atoms) would fall apart around you. 

# What remains?

The next question is, *What remains of a person once he or she has finished with this physical existence?*

# Some Bible 

Here are some of the places in the Bible that touch on life after life:

[Daniel 12.1-4]

[2 Maccabees 7.9]

[Mark 10.17-31]

[Luke 16.9-31]

[Luke 24.36-43]

What stands out to you?

# Nothing is lost in God

To finish up, a few fragments of thoughts. Life after life is a mystery. Jesus is the firstborn from the dead. He was, he is, he is to come. Underneath are the everlasting arms [Deuteronomy 33.27]. Nothing is lost in God. God is able to make all things new.

