---
title: "The weeping prophet"
output:
  html_document:
    df_print: paged
  word_document: default
date: '2022-01-30'
---

## A life of Jeremiah

The first reading today was the call of Jeremiah. Some of you might remember a song called [Jeremiah was a bullfrog](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IgKejlrT-sI). Here's something you might not know about that song:

> Some of the words are nonsensical. Axton [who wrote the song] wanted to persuade his record producers to record a new melody he had written, and the producers asked him to sing any words to the tune. A member of Three Dog Night [the band that sang it] said that the original lyrics to the song were "Jeremiah was a prophet" but no one liked it.

[Wikipedia: Joy to the World (Three Dog Night song)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joy_to_the_World_(Three_Dog_Night_song))

That is a pretty good summary of today's message: "Jeremiah was a prophet, but no one liked it."

So who was Jeremiah? They call him the weeping prophet. He is credited with writing the Books of 1 and 2 Kings, Jeremiah, and Lamentations. (He was helped by a scribe named Baruch.) He lived from about 650-570 BC (you have to count backwards for BC years). He was active for about forty years during the reigns of the last five kings of Judah: Josiah, Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah. He was there when Jerusalem fell to the Babylonians in 587 BC.

Jeremiah's messages were not popular. In his home town of Anathoth, his own people told him not to prophesy in the name of the LORD or they would kill him (Jer 11.21). In Jerusalem, a priest named Pashur had him beaten and put in stocks:

> When Pashhur the priest, the son of Immer, who was chief officer in the house of the Lord, heard Jeremiah prophesying these things, Pashhur had Jeremiah the prophet beaten and put him in the stocks that were at the upper Benjamin Gate, which was by the house of the Lord.

[Jer 20:1-2 NASB](https://crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Jeremiah+20%3A1#cv)

What happened the next day gives you an idea of why no one liked what Jeremiah said:

> On the next day, when Pashhur released Jeremiah from the stocks, Jeremiah said to him, “Pashhur is not the name the Lord has called you, but rather Magor-missabib. “For thus says the Lord, ‘Behold, I am going to make you a terror to yourself and to all your friends; and while your eyes look on, they will fall by the sword of their enemies. So I will give over all Judah to the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will carry them away as exiles to Babylon and will slay them with the sword.

[Jer 20:4 NASB](https://crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Jeremiah+20%3A4#cv)

Magor-missabib means "terror on every side."

Another time a group of officials had Jeremiah thrown into a muddy pit:

> Now Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah the son of Pashhur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashhur the son of Malchijah heard the words that Jeremiah was speaking to all the people, saying, “Thus says the Lord, ‘He who stays in this city will die by the sword and by famine and by pestilence, but he who goes out to the Chaldeans will live and have his own life as booty and stay alive.’ “Thus says the Lord, ‘This city will certainly be given into the hand of the army of the king of Babylon and he will capture it.’” Then the officials said to the king, “Now let this man be put to death, inasmuch as he is discouraging the men of war who are left in this city and all the people, by speaking such words to them; for this man is not seeking the well-being of this people but rather their harm.” So King Zedekiah said, “Behold, he is in your hands; for the king can do nothing against you.” Then they took Jeremiah and cast him into the cistern of Malchijah the king’s son, which was in the court of the guardhouse; and they let Jeremiah down with ropes. Now in the cistern there was no water but only mud, and Jeremiah sank into the mud.

[Jer 38:1-6 NASB](https://crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Jeremiah+38%3A1#cv)

An Ethiopian slave named Ebed-Melech went to the king and pleaded for Jeremiah's life. The king asked Ebed-Melech to get Jeremiah out, but not to tell the officials. It looks political -- the king was afraid of what the officials might do. In the end, Ebed-Melech got Jeremiah out, going to great lengths to avoid harming him in the process.

Jewish tradition compares Jeremiah with Moses:

> "As Moses was a prophet for forty years, so was Jeremiah; as Moses prophesied concerning Judah and Benjamin, so did Jeremiah; as Moses' own tribe [the Levites under Korah] rose up against him, so did Jeremiah's tribe revolt against him; Moses was cast into the water, Jeremiah into a pit; as Moses was saved by a slave (the slave of Pharaoh's daughter); so, Jeremiah was rescued by a slave (Ebed-melech); Moses reprimanded the people in discourses; so did Jeremiah."

[Wikipedia: Jeremiah](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeremiah)

So there is a short life of Jeremiah. The church father Tertullian tells us that he was stoned to death in Tahpanhes, Egypt, for telling the people truths they did not want to hear.

## Jeremiah's call

Let's return to Jeremiah's call and take a closer look. But first, let me ask a question. What is a prophet? Some say that a prophet is someone who tells you what is going to happen in the future. My Old Testament lecturer (John Olley) asked this same question then said "A prophet is someone who says 'God told me to tell you ...'"

Jeremiah's call contains themes found repeatedly in the lives of the Bible's prophets: an encounter with God, being chosen, the prophet's protest, God's rebuke, God's promise, and delivery of God's revelation. It begins like this:

> Now the word of the Lord came to me saying, “Before I formed you in the womb I knew you, and before you were born I consecrated you; I have appointed you a prophet to the nations.”

[Jer 1:4 NASB](https://crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Jeremiah+1%3A4#cv)

The first thing is the encounter with God. Jeremiah sums up his encounter as "the word of the Lord came to me." Moses saw a burning bush and a heard a voice [Exodus chap. 3]. Isaiah saw God seated on a high throne with a train that filled the temple and seraphs covering their eyes and calling "Holy, holy, holy" [Isaiah chapter 6]. Ezekiel saw a cloud surrounded by light, living creatures, a throne, and a being who looked like a man shining like bronze in a furnace. Then he heard a voice at which point the Spirit came into him [Ezekiel chapter 1]. John gives a similar account in the first chapter of Revelation.

I don't know how to explain these encounters except to say that these prophets encountered God. In Jeremiah's case, he encountered the "word of the Lord" which told him he was known before he was formed, consecrated before he was born (like John the Baptist), and appointed as a prophet to the nations. There is a mysterious timelessness when prophets encounter God. The distinctions between what was, what is, and what will be seem to blur. There is also the word of the Lord, who John the Apostle tells us was made flesh in Jesus Christ:

> The word was made flesh, he lived among us, and we saw his glory, the glory that is his as the only Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.

[John 1.14 JB]

The next things we see in Jeremiah's call are the prophet's protest and God's rebuke: "I don't know how to speak -- I'm only a kid!" to which God says, "Don't say I'm only a kid." Moses says the same thing: "I can't speak." God answers both with a promise of power, peace, and presence:

> Everywhere I send you, you shall go, and all that I command you, you shall speak. Do not be afraid of them, For I am with you to deliver you.

[Jer 1:7-8 NASB](https://crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Jeremiah+1%3A7#cv)

The last thing we see in Jeremiah's call is that God puts his message into the prophet's mouth:

> Then the Lord stretched out His hand and touched my mouth, and the Lord said to me, "Behold, I have put My words in your mouth."

[Jer 1:9 NASB](https://crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Jeremiah+1%3A9#cv)

God takes the initiative. Yes, the prophet is too young; yes, the prophet can't speak; yes, the prophet is unworthy. Here's what Isaiah said when he saw God:

> What a wretched state I am in! I am lost, for I am a man of unclean lips and I live among a people of unclean lips, and my eyes have looked at the King, the Lord of Hosts.

Upon which this happened:

> Then one of the seraphs flew to me, holding in his hand a live coal which he had taken from the altar with a pair of tongs. With this he touched my mouth and said: "See now, this has touched your lips, your sin is taken away, your iniquity is purged."

[Isaiah 1.5-7 JB]

Wrapped up in the encounter with God is deliverance from unworthiness. God has made a way for our sins to be taken away. As John the Baptist said, "Behold the Lamb of God."

## A living word

The last part of Jeremiah's call is the consequence of his appointment:

> "See, I have appointed you this day over the nations and over the kingdoms, to pluck up and to break down, to destroy and to overthrow, to build and to plant."

[Jer 1:9-10 NASB](https://crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Jeremiah+1%3A9#cv)

Jeremiah's message was unpopular. However, it was God's message so what it said would happen did happen. The nation of Judah was torn up and knocked down, it was destroyed and overthrown. Political machinations didn't help. What God said would happen did happen.

## So what

So what does all this mean for us? We are in church. The Greek word is ἐκκλησία, "to call out, to summon forth." Like the prophets, the church is called and summoned forth by God to say what God says. We can't do it without encountering God, we can't do it without being commissioned by God, we can't do it without being made fit for the purpose by God. We are entirely dependent on God to be able to do what we are meant to be doing. We need his Word to be in us, we need his Spirit.

Like the prophets we may not be popular and people might not like our message. However, we need not fear because God promises to be with us as we go about his business. And what is God's business? Jeremiah's commission ends with these words:

> to build and to plant.

Just as destruction of evils is inevitable under God, so is building up and planting. There is no better way to do this than to love on a grand scale. God's prophetic call is to love: to love the outcasts and thus foster industry; to love the sick and thus build space for healing; to love the least and thus outlaw slavery; to love the ignorant and thus invent public education; to love the hungry and thus grow food; to love the oppressed and thus do away with despotism; to love the hard done by and thus do away with corruption. All these things the church has done in good measure, though much planting and building remains to be done. Love is a sure guide and, because it is God's way, God will be with us when we get involved in God's future.

I might be able to speak the languages of men and angels but if I don't have love then I'm a noisy gong. I might have faith to move mountains but if I don't have love then I'm nothing. I might give everything away and die a martyr's death but if I don't love then it won't do any good. Prophecy, languages, knowledge -- all of these will end. The things that will last are faith, hope, and love, and the greatest of these is love.

Amen
