---
title: "Blessed"
featured_image: "/images/Micah_inscription.png"
date: '2023-01-29'
---

# Readings

## Hebrew Bible

> With what shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before God on high? Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with calves a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, with tens of thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

> He has told you, O mortal, what is good; and what does the Lord require of you but to do justice, and to love kindness, and to walk humbly with your God?

[Micah 6.6-8 NASB](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Micah+6%3A6#cv)

## New Testament

> Now when Jesus saw the crowds, He went up on the mountain; and after He sat down, His disciples came to Him. And He opened His mouth and began to teach them, saying,

> Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

> Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.

> Blessed are the gentle, for they will inherit the earth.

> Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be satisfied.

> Blessed are the merciful, for they will receive mercy.

> Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.

> Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called sons of God.

> Blessed are those who have been persecuted for the sake of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

> Blessed are you when people insult you and persecute you, and falsely say all kinds of evil against you because of Me. Rejoice and be glad, for your reward in heaven is great; for in this same way they persecuted the prophets who were before you.

> You are the salt of the earth; but if the salt has become tasteless, how can it be made salty again? It is no longer good for anything, except to be thrown out and trampled underfoot by people.

> You are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be hidden; nor do people light a lamp and put it under a basket, but on the lampstand, and it gives light to all who are in the house. Your light must shine before people in such a way that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.

[Matthew 5.1-12 NASB](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Matthew+5%3A1#cv)

# Introduction

What do we have to do, what do we have to be, to do what God requires? What happens if we do those things? What happens if we don't?

Micah gives an excellent summary of what God requires:

> He has told you, O mortal, what is good; and what does the Lord require of you but to do justice, and to love kindness, and to walk humbly with your God?

[Micah 6.8 NASB](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Micah+6%3A8#cv)

Jesus expands on this in his Sermon on the Mount, recorded for us in chapters five to seven of Matthew's Gospel.

# Which page?

If you were on a desert island and could only have one page of a book, what would it be? A page on how to build a boat? What if the island wasn't deserted and there were others there? What then? My choice, especially if there were others on the island, would be the Beatitudes and as much of the rest of the Sermon on the Mount as can fit on one page, hopefully two-sided. (The Sermon on the Mount covers Matthew chapters 5 to 7.) I don't know how well things would turn out, but if we put those words into practice then we would be on the right track.

# Twelve disciples

Matthew's Gospel tells us that there was a crowd, Jesus went up a hill, sat down, his disciples came to him, and he began to teach. The Gospels of Matthew and Mark tell us that four of the disciples had just left their fishing nets to follow Jesus. The first two were brothers: Simon (also known as Peter) and his brother Andrew. The second two were also brothers: James and his brother John. These two were Zebedee's sons, and were also known as the *sons of thunder*. Luke gives us a list of the twelve disciples Jesus chose early on to help in his mission to Israel. As Toby said last week, Jesus likes to get us involved in his work. Luke's list of the twelve *apostles* (which you can translate as *ambassadors* or *envoys*) starts with Peter, Andrew, James, and John but also includes Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, James (son of Alphaeus), Simon (called the zealot), Judas (of James), and Judas Iscariot. 

There was already some history between Jesus and these twelve. Chapter one of John's Gospel gives us more information. (This and the following quotations from John are taken from Richard Moore's translation, *Under the Southern Cross*.)

> Again, On the following day, John [the Baptist] was standing there with two of his disciples; after watching Jesus closely as he was moving about, he said, *Look! There's God's lamb.* His two disciples heard what he said and followed Jesus. When Jesus turned around and saw them following him, he asked them, *What do you want?*

[John 1.35-38 USC]

As Toby says in the *Update*, the Greek can be translated as *What are you searching for?* (See [*John 1:29-42 Commentary by Audrey West*](https://www.biblia.work/sermons/john-129-42-commentary-by-audrey-west/).) That's a good question, and we are not told their answer. If it was me, I think the answer would have been a blank stare... What *am* I searching for? What they did say was *Teacher, where are you staying?* He said, *Come and see.* The one telling the story says it was about four in the afternoon -- one of those little details that make me think this is an eye-witness account.

Those two disciples turn out to be two of the fishermen, John and Andrew. So they were hanging around John the Baptist before they left their nets to follow Jesus. John's Gospel tells us that Andrew then went and found his brother Peter and said, *We've found the Messiah*, and took Peter to meet Jesus. Jesus then went and found Philip, who is in Luke's list of the twelve, and said, *Follow me*. Philip found Nathanael, who might be the Bartholomew of Luke's list, and said *We've found the person about whom Moses wrote in the Law [...] he is Jesus, Joseph's son, from Nazareth*. Nathanael said, *Can anything good come out of Nazareth?* Philip said, *Come and see for yourself*. When Nathanael went to see Jesus, Jesus saw him coming and said, *Well now, here is an Israelite in whom there really is no deceit*.

To understand that comment, you need to know the story of Jacob. You may remember that Jacob was born clutching his brother Esau's heel. Later on he put on a sheep skin to trick his old father Isaac into giving him the first son's blessing. The name Jacob has a range of meanings that include *heel*, *follower*, *trickster*, and *deceitful*. Jacob is the same one who wrestled with God on the banks of the Jabbok (that feeds into the Jordan River, where John was baptizing people) and who God then renamed *Israel* (which means *struggles with God*). Jacob also had a dream of a ladder to heaven, which we read about in Genesis, chapter 28:

>  Then Jacob departed from Beersheba and went toward Haran. And he happened upon a particular place and spent the night there, because the sun had set; and he took one of the stones of the place and made it a support for his head, and lay down in that place. And he had a dream, and behold, a ladder was set up on the earth with its top reaching to heaven; and behold, the angels of God were ascending and descending on it.
	
> Then behold, the Lord was standing above it and said, “I am the Lord, the God of your father Abraham and the God of Isaac; the land on which you lie I will give to you and to your descendants. Your descendants will also be like the dust of the earth, and you will spread out to the west and to the east, and to the north and to the south; and in you and in your descendants shall all the families of the earth be blessed. Behold, I am with you and will keep you wherever you go, and will bring you back to this land; for I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.”
	
> Then Jacob awoke from his sleep and said, “The Lord is certainly in this place, and I did not know it!” And he was afraid and said, “How awesome is this place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!”

[Gen 28.10-17 NASB](https://www.crosswire.org/study/passagestudy.jsp?key=Genesis+28%3A10#cv)

Getting back to the disciples, after Jesus described him as a true Israelite in whom there is no deceit, Nathanael said, *Where did you find out about me?* Jesus said, *Before Philip went to get you, while you were still under the fig tree, I saw you.* At this point Nathanael said, *Rabbi, you are God's Son, you are the King of Israel*. Just as when Jesus told the woman at the well all about her life, Nathanael realised that he was in the presence of the prophet Moses had talked about. Then Jesus added, *You will see heaven opened, and God's angels ascending and descending on Humanity's Son.*

Luke's list of twelve continues on with Matthew, Thomas, James, Simon, Judas (of James), and Judas Iscariot. Matthew (whose Hebrew name was Levi) was a tax-collector and could therefore write. He is the same one who wrote down the Sermon on the Mount for us. Thomas is the same one we call *doubting Thomas*. He ended up saying *My Lord and my God* when he saw Jesus after his resurrection. Thomas is credited with taking the Gospel all the way to India.

As for the others, Mark's Gospel says that when Jesus taught in his home town of Nazareth, the locals were astonished. They said, *Isn't he the carpenter, Mary's son, and the brother of James, Joses, Jude, and Simon?* [Mark 6.3 USC] It might just be a coincidence that three of these names are at the end of Luke's list or else it's not a coincidence and these three were Jesus' brothers. We know from Eusebius [Church History, 3.19-20] that Jude's grandsons were persecuted by a Roman Emperor named Domitian because they were seen as a political threat. (*Jude* and *Judas* are optional ways to say the same name, a bit like *Jim* and *James*.)

The final one in the list is another Judas, a different Judas to the *Judas of James* in Luke's list, the one who could be Jesus' brother Jude. The final Judas in Luke's list is Judas Iscariot, who betrayed Jesus.

# Go away from me Lord

When will we ever get to the Beatitudes? Almost there, but first a bit more on Peter. The first we hear of Peter in Luke's Gospel is that Jesus reprimanded a fever in his mother-in-law and it left her. Not long afterwards, Jesus asked Peter if he could use his boat as a preaching platform because the crowd was pressing in on him. You know the story... When Jesus finished speaking he said to Peter to go out deeper and let down his nets for a catch. Peter said they'd been fishing all night and caught nothing but would nevertheless do it because Jesus said so. The catch was so huge that the nets started to break. They called over their partners to help with the catch and both boats were filled to the point of sinking. Then Peter fell at Jesus' knees and said *Leave me Master, for I am a sinful man.* [Luke 5.5-8 USC]

# The Beatitudes

So we arrive at the Beatitudes. Jesus begins to teach his disciples. Maybe he was looking at Peter when he said, *Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven*? Maybe he looked at the other fishermen when he said *Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth*? Did he turn to Nathanael when he said *Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God*? Was he looking at his brothers when he said *Blessed are you when people abuse you and persecute you and speak all kinds of evil against you on my account*?

These verses are sublime. They seem to turn everything upside down. The least turn out to be the blessed. Those who mourn will be consoled. Those who hunger for what is right will be satisfied. Those who seek peace will be called God's children. They are the heirs of God's kingdom.

These verses have a beautiful symmetry. The phrases form a tapestry, building on each other to provide deeper insights. Those who meditate upon them will be rewarded.

These verses are a divine summary of the essential wisdom that Christ wants to engrave on our hearts, words to live by that evoke the highest ideals and continue to inspire us.

How does one summarize the divine? I've looked at the structure, trying to find the most important part. However, my attempts have been a miserable failure. Maybe this is God's wisdom saying that all of it is important. Nevertheless, I press on in my folly. Looking at the middle is often a good place to start, and if I'm not wrong the central phrase is this: *Blessed are the merciful, for they shall have mercy shown to them.* This is indeed a major theme of what follows. The Beatitudes are a prelude to the very practical teaching that comprises the Sermon on the Mount. Jesus teaches us that true religion is all about right action. It's no good just hearing what is good, we have to put it into practice. We need to actually do something. That can mean working together, which brings up the question of how. There is good advice on this point: don't complain about the speck in your brother's eye -- take the plank out of your own eye first. Other good advice from Jesus' Sermon is to have a good eye and not an evil eye. That is, be magnanimous, not mean-spirited. And through all the hardships you will encounter, don't worry. God saw you before you knew it. He cares for you like he cares for the birds and flowers of the field.

Friends, I can tell you to do what Jesus says, but who am I to talk when I am so bad at doing it myself? Life has a way of wearing us down. We can start off enthusiastic but end up jaded. What can I say? Let joy be your guide. Find the place where God is even though you didn't know it. Hear Him and rely on Him. Don't waste your days thinking about what someone else should be doing -- redeem the time and think about what you can do then have a go. Know that God will be with you from the first step you take and will remain with you wherever the journey leads.

Amen

# Acknowledgments

The image of the Micah 6.8 inscription is from a picture of the Rundel Memorial Building in New York taken by [Amy Cools](https://ordinaryphilosophy.com/2016/04/01/spotted-a-definition-of-philosophy-and-of-religion-on-a-library-wall/).

Quotations are from the [New American Standard Bible](https://www.crosswire.org/study/fulllibrary.jsp?show=NASB), Richard Moore's translation titled [Under the Southern Cross](https://www.arkhousepress.com/under-the-southern-cross-the-new-testament-in-australian-english/), and the [Jerusalem Bible](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jerusalem_Bible).
